dbt Cloud quickstart guides (#2749)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/quickstarts/dbt-cloud/bigquery-qs.md

---
title: "Quickstart for dbt Cloud and BigQuery"
description: "Quickstart for dbt Cloud and BigQuery."
id: "bigquery"
sidebar_label: "BigQuery quickstart"
---
For the BigQuery project in the quickstart guide, you'll learn how to set up BigQuery and connect it to dbt Cloud.
This guide will walk you through:

- Setting up a new BigQuery instance &mdash; Log in and create a new Google Cloud project​.
- Accessing sample data in a public dataset &mdash; BigQuery supports public data sets that can be directly queried, so we will show you how to access those datasets via select statements. Additionally, we will show you how to populate your own database objects with that data.

> - Connecting dbt Cloud to BigQuery &mdash; 

Reviewer: Did we need a little definition here to round it out?

:::tip Videos for you
You can check out [dbt Fundamentals](https://courses.getdbt.com/courses/fundamentals) for free if you're interested in course learning with videos.

:::

## Prerequisites​

- You have a  [dbt Cloud account](https://cloud.getdbt.com/). 
- You have a [Google account](https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/27441?hl=en).
- You can use a personal or work account to set up BigQuery through [Google Cloud Platform (GCP)](https://cloud.google.com/free).

## Create a new GCP project​

1. Go to the [BigQuery Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery) after you log in to your Google account. If you have multiple Google accounts, make sure you’re using the correct one. 

> 2. Create a [new project from the Console](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects#creating_a_project). GCP automatically populates the Project name field for you. You can change it to be more descriptive for your use. For example, `dbt Learn - BigQuery Setup`.

Reviewer: It might feel smoother to link to the page they need to access and then let them know the docs link is a docs link. It felt abrupt going to docs first. I thought I'd be going to GCP.
```suggestion
2. Create a new project from the [managed resources page](https://console.cloud.google.com/projectcreate?previousPage=%2Fcloud-resource-manager%3Fwalkthrough_id%3Dresource-manager--create-project%26project%3D%26folder%3D%26organizationId%3D%23step_index%3D1&walkthrough_id=resource-manager--create-project). For more information, refer to [Creating a project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects#creating_a_project) in the Google Cloud documentation. GCP automatically populates the Project name field for you. You can change it to be more descriptive for your use. For example, `dbt Learn - BigQuery Setup`.
```

## Create BigQuery datasets

> 1. Verify that you can run SQL queries. Copy and paste these queries into the Query Editor: 

Reviewer: I'm still at the managed resources page. Maybe we should orient the user by adding a step:
From the [BigQuery console](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery), click **Editor**.

Reviewer: We might also tell then to make sure they selected their newly created project, which is shown at the top.

    ```sql
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.customers`;
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.orders`;
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.stripe.payment`;
    ```

>     Then, check for results from the queries. For example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Click **Run** then, check for results from the queries. For example: 
```

    <div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>
    <Lightbox src="/img/bigquery/query-results.png" title="Bigquery Query Results" />
    </div>

> 2. Create [new BigQuery datasets](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/datasets#create-dataset). Datasets in BigQuery are equivalent to schemas in a traditional database. On the **Create dataset** page:

Reviewer: Similar comment as above, Maybe we can tell them "From the [BigQuery console](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery)" and give context that we're linking to the docs.

>     - **Dataset ID** &mdash; Enter a name that fits the purpose. This name is used like schema in fully qualified references to your database objects such as database.schema.table. As an example for this guide, create one for jaffle_shop and another one for stripe afterward.

Reviewer: I feel like these might get missed if we don't call them out in some way. Also matching to what is below
```suggestion
    - **Dataset ID** &mdash; Enter a name that fits the purpose. This name is used like schema in fully qualified references to your database objects such as `database.schema.table`. As an example for this guide, create one for `jaffle_shop` and another one for `stripe` afterward.
```

    - **Data location** &mdash; Leave it blank (the default). It determines the GCP location of where your data is stored. The current default location is the US multi-region. All tables within this dataset will share this location.
    - **Enable table expiration** &mdash; Leave it unselected (the default). The default for the billing table expiration is 60 days. Because billing isn’t enabled for this project, GCP defaults to deprecating tables.

>     - **Google-managed encryption key** &mdash; Allow Google to manage encryption (the default).

Reviewer: You need to click *advanced* here first.

    <div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>
    <Lightbox src="/img/bigquery/create-dataset-id.png" title="Bigquery Create Dataset ID" />
    </div>
3. After you create the `jaffle_shop` dataset, create one for `stripe` with all the same values except for **Dataset ID**.

## Generate BigQuery credentials {#generate-bigquery-credentials}
In order to let dbt connect to your warehouse, you'll need to generate a keyfile. This is analogous to using a database username and password with most other <Term id="data-warehouse">data warehouses</Term>.

1. Start the [GCP credentials wizard](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/credentials/wizard). Make sure your new project is selected in the header. If you do not see your account or project, click your profile picture to the right and verify you are using the correct email account. For **Credential Type**: 
    - From the **Select an API** dropdown, choose **BigQuery API**
    - Select **Application data** for the type of data you will be accessing
    - Select **No, I’m not using them** and click **Next**.
    - Click **Continue** in the popup to create a new service account.

> 2. [Create a service account](https://developers.google.com/workspace/guides/create-credentials#service-account). As an example for this guide, you can:

Reviewer: Same comment as above about linking to the docs by saying, "For more information, refer to xyz in the Google BigQuery Documentation"

    - Enter `dbt-user` as the **Service account name**
    - From the **Select a role** dropdown, choose **BigQuery Admin** 
    - Leave the **Grant users access to this service account** fields blank

> 3. [Create a service account key](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/creating-managing-service-account-keys#creating). When downloading the JSON file, make sure to use a filename you can easily remember. For example, `dbt-user-creds.json`. 

Reviewer: Same comment as above about linking to the docs by sending them to "https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts?walkthrough_id=iam--create-service-account-keys&start_index=1#step_index=1" and then saying, "For more information, refer to xyz in the Google BigQuery Documentation"

    - **Google-managed encryption key** &mdash; Allow Google to manage encryption (the default).
    <div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>
    <Lightbox src="/img/bigquery/create-dataset-id.png" title="Bigquery Create Dataset ID" />
    </div>
3. After you create the `jaffle_shop` dataset, create one for `stripe` with all the same values except for **Dataset ID**.

## Generate BigQuery credentials {#generate-bigquery-credentials}
In order to let dbt connect to your warehouse, you'll need to generate a keyfile. This is analogous to using a database username and password with most other <Term id="data-warehouse">data warehouses</Term>.

1. Start the [GCP credentials wizard](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/credentials/wizard). Make sure your new project is selected in the header. If you do not see your account or project, click your profile picture to the right and verify you are using the correct email account. For **Credential Type**: 
    - From the **Select an API** dropdown, choose **BigQuery API**
    - Select **Application data** for the type of data you will be accessing
    - Select **No, I’m not using them** and click **Next**.

>     - Click **Continue** in the popup to create a new service account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Click **Next** to create a new service account.
```

2. [Create a service account](https://developers.google.com/workspace/guides/create-credentials#service-account). As an example for this guide, you can:

>     - Enter `dbt-user` as the **Service account name**

Reviewer: Per the style guide.
```suggestion
    - Type `dbt-user` as the **Service account name**
    - Click *Create and continue*
```

>     - From the **Select a role** dropdown, choose **BigQuery Admin** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - From the **Select a role** dropdown, choose **BigQuery Admin** and click **Continue**
```

>     - Leave the **Grant users access to this service account** fields blank

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Leave the **Grant users access to this service account** fields blank
    - Click **Done*
```

3. [Create a service account key](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/creating-managing-service-account-keys#creating). When downloading the JSON file, make sure to use a filename you can easily remember. For example, `dbt-user-creds.json`. 

## Connect dbt Cloud to BigQuery​
1. Create a new project in [dbt Cloud](https://cloud.getdbt.com/). From **Account settings** (using the gear menu in the top right corner), click **+ New Project**.
2. Enter a project name and click **Continue**.
3. For the warehouse, click **BigQuery** then **Next** to set up your connection.
4. Click **Upload a Service Account JSON File** in settings.
5. Select the JSON file you downloaded in [Generate BigQuery credentials](#generate-bigquery-credentials) and dbt Cloud will fill in all the necessary fields.
6. Click **Test Connection**. This verifies that dbt Cloud can access your BigQuery account.

> 7. Click **Continue** if the test succeeded. If it failed, you might need to go back and regenerate your BigQuery credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Click **Next** if the test succeeded. If it failed, you might need to go back and regenerate your BigQuery credentials.
```

## Set up a dbt Cloud managed repository 
<Snippet src="tutorial-managed-repo" />

## Initialize your dbt project​ and start developing
Now that you have a repository configured, you can initialize your project and start development in dbt Cloud:

1. Click **Develop** from the upper left. It might take a few minutes for your project to spin up for the first time as it establishes your git connection, clones your repo, and tests the connection to the warehouse.

> 2. Above the file tree to the left, click **Initialize your project**. This builds out your folder structure with example models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Above the file tree to the left, click **Initialize dbt project**. This builds out your folder structure with example models.
```

> 3. Make your initial commit by clicking **Commit**. Use the commit message `initial commit`. This creates the first commit to your managed repo and allows you to open a branch where you can add new dbt code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Make your initial commit by clicking **Commit & Sync**. Use the commit message `initial commit` and click **Commit**. This creates the first commit to your managed repo and allows you to open a branch where you can add new dbt code.
```

4. You can now directly query data from your warehouse and execute `dbt run`. You can try this out now:
    - In the IDE's editor, add this query: 
        ```sql
        select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.customers`
        ```

>     - In the command line bar at the bottom, enter `dbt run` and click **Enter**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In the command line bar at the bottom, enter `dbt run` and click **Enter**. You should see a **dbt run succeeded** message.
```

## Build your first model
1. Click **Develop** from the upper left of dbt Cloud. You need to create a new branch since the main branch is now set to read-only mode. 
2. Click **Create branch**. You can name it `add-customers-model`.

> 3. Click **Develop** from the upper left of dbt Cloud.

Reviewer: I think this is wrong and can be removed.
```suggestion
```

> 4. Click the **...** next to the Models directory, then select **Create file**.  

Reviewer: Remember to fix following step numbers now that we removed one.

5. Name the file `models/customers.sql`, then click **Create**.

> 6. Copy the following query into the file and click **Save File**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Copy the following query into the file and click **Save**.
```

```sql
with customers as (

    select
        id as customer_id,
        first_name,
        last_name

    from `dbt-tutorial`.jaffle_shop.customers

),

orders as (

    select
        id as order_id,
        user_id as customer_id,
        order_date,
        status

    from `dbt-tutorial`.jaffle_shop.orders

),

customer_orders as (

    select
        customer_id,

        min(order_date) as first_order_date,
        max(order_date) as most_recent_order_date,
        count(order_id) as number_of_orders

    from orders

    group by 1

),

final as (

    select
        customers.customer_id,
        customers.first_name,
        customers.last_name,
        customer_orders.first_order_date,
        customer_orders.most_recent_order_date,
        coalesce(customer_orders.number_of_orders, 0) as number_of_orders

    from customers

    left join customer_orders using (customer_id)

)

select * from final
```

> 7. Enter `dbt run` in the command prompt at the bottom of the screen. You should get a successful run and see three models under DETAILS.

Reviewer: There's no "DETAILS" to look under. They just show up.

---
title: "Quickstart for dbt Cloud and BigQuery"
description: "Quickstart for dbt Cloud and BigQuery."
id: "bigquery"
sidebar_label: "BigQuery quickstart"
---

> For the BigQuery project in the quickstart guide, you'll learn how to use dbt Cloud with BigQuery.

Reviewer 2: Don't really know what the first half of this sentence means - what's a BigQuery project in this context?

Author: thanks for flagging! totally copy/pasta on my end. will fix in all 4 qs

## Create BigQuery datasets

1. From the [BigQuery Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery), click **Editor**. Make sure to select your newly created project, which is available at the top of the page.
1. Verify that you can run SQL queries. Copy and paste these queries into the Query Editor: 
    ```sql
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.customers`;
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.orders`;
    select * from `dbt-tutorial.stripe.payment`;
    ```

    Click **Run**, then check for results from the queries. For example: 
    <div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>
    <Lightbox src="/img/bigquery/query-results.png" title="Bigquery Query Results" />
    </div>
2. Create new datasets from the [BigQuery Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery). For more information, refer to [Create datasets](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/datasets#create-dataset) in the Google Cloud docs. Datasets in BigQuery are equivalent to schemas in a traditional database. On the **Create dataset** page:

>     - **Dataset ID** &mdash; Enter a name that fits the purpose. This name is used like schema in fully qualified references to your database objects such as `database.schema.table`. As an example for this guide, create one for `jaffle_shop` and another one for `stripe` afterward.

Reviewer 2: Should it be `database.dataset.table`? I don't know enough about BQ to say for sure, but it's confusing that you talk about datasets and how they're replacements for schemas, and then you use schema as your example word

Author: hmmm. i'm not an expert either. it's what's used in the original copy here https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/get-started/getting-started/getting-set-up/setting-up-bigquery#loading-data

    - From the **Select an API** dropdown, choose **BigQuery API**
    - Select **Application data** for the type of data you will be accessing
    - Select **No, I’m not using them** and click **Next**.
    - Click **Next** to create a new service account.
2. Create a service account for your new project from the [Service accounts page](https://console.cloud.google.com/projectselector2/iam-admin/serviceaccounts?supportedpurview=project). For more information, refer to [Create a service account](https://developers.google.com/workspace/guides/create-credentials#create_a_service_account) in the Google Cloud docs. As an example for this guide, you can:
    - Type `dbt-user` as the **Service account name**
    - From the **Select a role** dropdown, choose **BigQuery Admin** and click **Continue** 
    - Leave the **Grant users access to this service account** fields blank
    - Click **Done**

> 3. Create a service account key for your new project from the [Service accounts page](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts?walkthrough_id=iam--create-service-account-keys&start_index=1#step_index=1). For more information, refer to [Create a service account key](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/creating-managing-service-account-keys#creating) in the Google Cloud docs. When downloading the JSON file, make sure to use a filename you can easily remember. For example, `dbt-user-creds.json`. 

Reviewer 2: We might want to call out that this json file should be protected like a username + password, i.e. they shoulnd't leave it in their Downloads folder after uploading it to dbt Cloud or check it into source control

6. Click **Test Connection**. This verifies that dbt Cloud can access your BigQuery account.
7. Click **Next** if the test succeeded. If it failed, you might need to go back and regenerate your BigQuery credentials.

## Set up a dbt Cloud managed repository 
<Snippet src="tutorial-managed-repo" />

## Initialize your dbt project​ and start developing
Now that you have a repository configured, you can initialize your project and start development in dbt Cloud:

1. Click **Develop** from the upper left. It might take a few minutes for your project to spin up for the first time as it establishes your git connection, clones your repo, and tests the connection to the warehouse.
2. Above the file tree to the left, click **Initialize dbt project**. This builds out your folder structure with example models.
3. Make your initial commit by clicking **Commit & Sync**. Use the commit message `initial commit` and click **Commit**. This creates the first commit to your managed repo and allows you to open a branch where you can add new dbt code.
4. You can now directly query data from your warehouse and execute `dbt run`. You can try this out now:

>     - Click **+ Create new file** and add this query to the new file: 

Reviewer 2: Creating a new file just creates a Scratchpad. When we're on the `main` branch, it can't be saved, and as such won't be built in a `dbt run`. If we were on a different branch, then it could be saved, but you'd need to specify that. 

Fun fact: not saving the file caught me out on my very first runthrough of dbt way back when, because it didn't get picked up in my `dbt run`!

Author: wow! tysm for flagging this!

Author: fixed this in all 4 quickstarts

        ```sql
        select * from `dbt-tutorial.jaffle_shop.customers`
        ```

>     - In the command line bar at the bottom, enter `dbt run` and click **Enter**. You should see a `dbt run succeeded` message.

Reviewer 2: Follow on from ☝️: 

So this is true, but it's not going to have built that `select * from customers` query. I'm not sure if you're trying to suggest that it will, or just having people run that query to prove that their connection works

## Build your first model

> 1. Click **Develop** from the upper left of dbt Cloud. You need to create a new branch since the main branch is now set to read-only mode. 

Reviewer 2: "now set" implies a change in state; it is _always_ readonly

Author: ty! fixed in all 4 qs

2. Click **Create branch**. You can name it `add-customers-model`.
3. Click the **...** next to the Models directory, then select **Create file**.  
4. Name the file `models/customers.sql`, then click **Create**.
5. Copy the following query into the file and click **Save**.

```sql
with customers as (

    select
        id as customer_id,
        first_name,
        last_name

>     from `dbt-tutorial`.jaffle_shop.customers

Reviewer 2: Weird that these aren't sources! I guess I get it since this is easier, but it also means we're teaching bad habits

Reviewer: @nghi-ly maybe you can create a follow-up issue to address Joel's comment here.

Author: great idea! here it is: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2978
